#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
convert_yeast_genome_version.pl

==SYNOPSIS==
convert_yeast_genome_version.pl `[`options`]` <**file1> <**file2> ...

{{{
  Options:
  --in <file>
  --convert <integer>
  --(no)roman
  --db <text>
  --version
  --help
}}}
{{{
}}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

__--in <**file>

__
  Provide the input file to be converted. Supported files include GFF,  BED, SGR, and text files with chromosome, start, stop, and/or position  columns. !BigWig** files are also supported by going through a conversion  step.
__
  __
__--convert <**integer>

__
  If you happen to know the custom index number for the conversion method,  then Great! you can put it here to save time. Otherwise, the program  will interactively present a list of available conversions from which  to select.
__
  __
__--(no)roman

__
  Boolean flag to indicate whether or not the chromosome name should be  converted from Arabic (normal) numerals to Roman numerals (used by SGD).  The default is false.
__
  __
__--db <**text>

__
  If you're converting a bigWig file, provide a database name to collect  chromosome names and sizes.
__
  __
__--version

__
  Print the version number.
__
  __
__--help

__
  Display this POD documentation.
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This script will shift coordinates due to indels from one genome release to  another. It will accept GFF, BED, and bigWig files. It was primarily designed  to work with genomic data (microarray values, etc) and simple segments, not  complex features. It will convert both start and stop coordinates, ignoring  strand.

Only a limited number of version conversions are available.  New conversions may be generated by comparing genomic sequence using the  EMBOSS utility diffseq, with a word size of 8 or 10 bp, then doing some  magic manipulations to identify the indels and calculate shifts, often with  manual inspection of alignments. This is not a trivial process.

Check SGD (http://www.yeastgenome.org) to identify and obtain the available  yeast genome version releases.

==AVAILABLE CONVERSIONS==
1) 20050806 (SGD R43) to 20070113 (SGD R55)

2) 20051106 (SGD R46) to 20070113 (SGD R55)

3) 20060204 (SGD R52) to 20070113 (SGD R55)

4) 20031001 (SGD R27, UCSC !SacCer1**) to 20070113 (SGD R55)

5) 200601xx (SGD R52?) to 20070113 (SGD R55)

6) 20060916 (Pugh's !GeneTrack**, SGD R53) to 20070113 (SGD R55)

7) 20070113 (SGD R55) to 20100109 (SGD R63)

8) 20050806 (perocchi..steinmetz 2007, SGD R43?) to 20100109 (SGD R63)

9) 20070901 (xu..steinmetz 2009, SGD R56) to 20100109 (SGD R63)

10) 20100109 (SGD R63) to 20110203 (SGD R64, UCSC !SacCer3**)

11) 20080606 (SGD R61, UCSC !SacCer2**) to 20110203 (SGD R64, UCSC !SacCer3**)

==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

