#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
get_binned_data.pl

A program to collect data in bins across a list of features.

==SYNOPSIS==
{{{
 get_binned_data.pl [--options] <filename>
  }}}
{{{
  Options for existing files:
  --in <filename>
  }}}
{{{
  Options for new files:
  --db <name | filename>
  --feature <type | type:source | alias>, ...
  }}}
{{{
  Options for data collection:
  --ddb <name | filename>
  --data <dataset_name | filename>
  --method [mean|median|stddev|min|max|sum|rpm|rpkm]        (mean)
  --value [score|count|length]                              (score)
  --strand [all|sense|antisense]                            (all)
  --force_strand
  --long
  --(no)log
  }}}
{{{
  Bin specification:
  --bins <integer>                                          (10)
  --ext <integer>                                           (0)
  --extsize <integer>
  --min <integer>
  }}}
{{{
  Post-processing:
  --sum
  --smooth
  }}}
{{{
  General options:
  --out <filename>
  --gz
  --cpu <integer>                                           (2)
  --version
  --help
}}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

__--in <**filename>

__
  Specify an input file containing either a list of database features or  genomic coordinates for which to collect data. The file should be a  tab-delimited text file, one row per feature, with columns representing  feature identifiers, attributes, coordinates, and/or data values. The  first row should be column headers. Bed files are acceptable, as are  text files generated by other _*_!BioToolBox**_*_ scripts. Files may be  gzipped compressed.
__
  __
__--db <**name | filename>

__
  Specify the name of a `Bio::DB::SeqFeature::Store` annotation database  from which gene or feature annotation may be derived. A database is  required for generating new data files with features. This option may  skipped when using coordinate information from an input file (e.g. BED  file), or when using an existing input file with the database indicated  in the metadata. For more information about using annotation databases,  see <[https://code.google.com/p/biotoolbox/wiki/WorkingWithDatabases]>.
__
  __
__--feature <**type | type:source | alias>,...

__
  Specify the type of feature from which to collect values. This is required  only for new feature tables. Three types of values may be passed: the  feature type, feature type and source expressed as 'type:source', or an  alias to one or more feature types. Aliases are specified in the  `biotoolbox.cfg` file and provide a shortcut to a list of one or more  database features. More than one feature may be included as a  comma-delimited list (no spaces).
__
  __
__--ddb <**name | filename>

__
  If the data to be collected is from a second database that is separate  from the annotation database, provide the name of the data database here.  Typically, a second `Bio::DB::SeqFeature::Store` or !BigWigSet** database  is provided here.
__
  __
__--data <**dataset_name | filename>

__
  Provide the name of the dataset to collect the values. If no  dataset is specified on the command line, then the program will  interactively present a list of datasets from the database to select.
__
  __
  The dataset may be a feature type in a !BioPerl** Bio::DB::!SeqFeature**::Store  or Bio::DB::!BigWigSet** database. Provide either the feature type or  type:source. The feature may point to another data file whose path is  stored in the feature's attribute tag (for example a binary  Bio::Graphics::Wiggle .wib file, a bigWig file, or Bam file), or the  features' scores may be used in data collection.
__
  __
  Alternatively, the dataset may be a database file, including bigWig (.bw),  bigBed (.bb), or Bam alignment (.bam) files. The files may be local or  remote (specified with a http: or ftp: prefix).
__
  __
__--method `[`mean|median|stddev|min|max|range|sum|rpm|rpkm`]`

__
  Specify the method for combining all of the dataset values within the  genomic region of the feature. Accepted values include:
__
  __
{{{
  - mean        (default)
  - median
  - sum
  - stddev      Standard deviation of the population (within the region)
  - min
  - max
  - rpm         Reads Per Million mapped, for Bam and BigBed only
  - rpkm        Same as rpm but normalized for gene length in kb
}}}
__--value `[`score|count|length`]`

__
  Optionally specify the type of data value to collect from the dataset or  data file. Three values are accepted: score, count, or length. The default  value type is score. Note that some data sources only support certain  types of data values. Wig and !BigWig** files only support score and count;  !BigBed** and database features support count and length and optionally  score; Bam files support basepair coverage (score), count (number of  alignments), and length.
__
  __
__--strand `[`all|sense|antisense`]`

__
  Specify whether stranded data should be collected. Three values are  allowed: all datasets should be collected (default), only sense  datasets, or only antisense datasets should be collected.
__
  __
__--force_strand

__
  For features that are not inherently stranded (strand value of 0) or that you want to impose a different strand, set this option when collecting stranded data. This will reassign the specified strand for each feature regardless of its original orientation. This requires the presence of a "strand" column in the input data file. This option only works with input file lists of database features, not defined genomic regions (e.g. BED files). Default is false.
__
  __
__--long

__
  Indicate that the dataset from which scores are collected are  long features (counting genomic annotation for example) and not point  data (microarray data or sequence coverage). Normally long features are  only recorded at their midpoint, leading to inaccurate representation at  some windows. This option forces the program to collect data separately  at each window, rather than once for each file feature or region and  subsequently assigning scores to windows. Execution times may be  longer than otherwise. Default is false.
__
  __
__--(no)log

__
  Dataset values are (not) in log2 space and should be treated  accordingly. Output values will be in the same space.
__
  __
__--bins <**integer>

__
  Specify the number of bins that will be generated over the length  of the feature. The size of the feature is a percentage of the  feature length. The default number is 10, which results in bins of  size equal to 10% of the feature length.
__
  __
__--ext <**integer>

__
  Specify the number of extended bins on either side of the feature.  The bins are of the same size as determined by the feature  length and the --bins value. The default is 0.
__
  __
__--extsize <**integer>

__
  Specify the exact bin size in bp of the extended bins rather than using a percentage of feature of length.
__
  __
__--min <**integer>

__
  Specify the minimum feature size to be averaged. Features with a length below this value will not be skipped (all bins will have null values). This is to avoid having bin sizes below the average  microarray tiling distance. The default is undefined (no limit).
__
  __
__--sum

__
  Indicate that the data should be averaged across all features at each position, suitable for graphing. A separate text file will be written with the suffix '`_`summed' with the averaged data. The default  is false.
__
  __
__--smooth

__
  Indicate that windows without values should (not) be interpolated from neighboring values. The default is false.
__
  __
__--out <**filename>

__
  Specify the output file name.
__
  __
__--gz

__
  Specify whether (or not) the output file should be compressed with gzip.
__
  __
__--cpu <**integer>

__
  Specify the number of CPU cores to execute in parallel. This requires  the installation of Parallel::!ForkManager**. With support enabled, the  default is 2. Disable multi-threaded execution by setting to 1.
__
  __
__--version

__
  Print the version number.
__
  __
__--help

__
  This help text.
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This program will collect data across a gene or feature body into numerous  percentile bins. It is used to determine if there is a spatial  distribution preference for the dataset over gene bodies. The number  of bins may be specified as a command argument (default 10). Additionally,  extra bins may be extended on either side of the gene (default 0 on either  side). The bin size is determined as a percentage of gene length.

The program writes out a tim data formatted text file. It will also  optionally generate a summary or average profile for all of the features.

==EXAMPLES==
These are some examples of some common scenarios for collecting data.

Collect scores in intervals

__
  You want to collect the mean score from a bigWig file in 10% intervals  across each feature in a Bed file.
__
  __
{{{
  get_binned_data.pl --data scores.bw --in input.bed
}}}
Collect scores in intervals plus extended regions

__
  You want to collect the maximum score in 5% intervals across each each  feature as well as five 100 bp intervals outside of each interval.
__
  __
{{{
  get_binned_data.pl --bins 20 --method max --ext 5 --extsize 100 --data \
  scores.bw --in input.txt
}}}
Collect scores in intervals for genes

__
  You want to collect stranded alignment counts from a Bam file for genes  in an annotation database, then generate a profile graph.
__
  __
{{{
  get_binned_data.pl --db annotation --feature gene --strand sense --value \
  count --method sum --data alignments.bam --out gene_profile --sum
  }}}
{{{
  graph_profile.pl --in gene_profile_summed.txt --min 0 --max 100
}}}
==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Howard Hughes Medical Institute
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

