#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
data2wig.pl

A script to convert a generic data file into a wig file.

==SYNOPSIS==
data2wig.pl `[`--options...`]` <**filename>

{{{
  Options:
  --in <filename>
  --out <filename> 
  --step [fixed | variable | bed]
  --bed | --bdg
  --size <integer>
  --span <integer>
  --index | --score <column_index>
  --chr <column_index>
  --start | --pos <column_index>
  --stop | --end <column_index>
  --name <text>
  --(no)track
  --mid
  --inter | --zero
  --format [0 | 1 | 2 | 3]
  --method [mean | median | sum | max]
  --log
  --bigwig | --bw
  --chromof <filename>
  --db <database>
  --bwapp </path/to/wigToBigWig>
  --keep
  --gz
  --version
  --help
}}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

__--in <**filename>

__
  Specify the file name of a data file, with or without the --in flag. The file may be any tab-delimited text file, including GFF, BED, !BedGraph**, or SGR file formats. Genome coordinate columns should be recognizable or manually specified, including chromosome, start, and optionally stop. Strand is ignored in input data files. The file may  be compressed with gzip.
__
  __
__--out <**filename>

__
  Optionally specify the name of of the output file. The track name is  used as default. The '.wig' extension is automatically added if required.
__
  __
__--step `[`fixed | variable | bed`]`

__
  The type of step progression for the wig file. Three wig formats are  available:    - fixedStep: where data points are positioned at equal distances          along the chromosome   - variableStep: where data points are variably positioned along          the chromosome.    - bed (bedGraph): where scores are associated with intervals          defined by start and stop coordinates. The fixedStep wig file has one column of data (score), the variableStep  wig file has two columns (position and score), and the bedGraph has  four columns of data (chromosome, start, stop, score). If the option  is not defined, then the format is automatically determined from the  metadata of the file.
__
  __
__--bed

__
__--bdg

__
  Convenience option to specify a bedGraph file should be written. Same as  specifying --step=bed.
__
  __
__--size <**integer>

__
  Optionally define the step size in bp for 'fixedStep' wig file. This  value is automatically determined from the table's metadata, if available.  If the --step option is explicitly defined as 'fixed', then the step size  may also be explicitly defined. If this value is not explicitly defined or automatically determined, the variableStep format is used by default.
__
  __
__--span <**integer>

__
  Optionally indicate the size of the region in bp to which the data value  should be assigned. The same size is assigned to all data values in the  wig file. This is useful, for example, with microarray data where all of  the oligo probes are the same length and you wish to assign the value  across the oligo rather than the midpoint. The default is inherently 1 bp.
__
  __
__--index <**column_index>

__
__--score <**column_index>

__
  Indicate the column index (0-based) of the dataset in the data table  to be used for the score. If a GFF file is used as input, the score column is  automatically selected. If not defined as an option, then the program will interactively ask the user for the column index from a list of available columns.
__
  __
__--chr <**column_index>

__
  Optionally specify the column index (0-based) of the chromosome or  sequence identifier. This is required to generate the wig file. It may be  identified automatically from the column header names.
__
  __
__--start <**column_index>

__
__--pos <**column_index>

__
  Optionally specify the column index (0-based) of the start or chromosome  position. This is required to generate the wig file. It may be  identified automatically from the column header names.
__
  __
__--start <**column_index>

__
__--end <**column_index>

__
  Optionally specify the column index (0-based) of the stop or end  position. It may be identified automatically from the column header names.
__
  __
__--name <**text>

__
  The name of the track defined in the wig file. The default is to use  the name of the chosen score column, or, if the input file is a GFF file,  the base name of the input file.
__
  __
__--(no)track

__
  Do (not) include the track line at the beginning of the wig file. Wig  files normally require a track line, but if you will be converting to  the binary bigwig format, the converter requires no track line. Why it  can't simply ignore the line is beyond me. This option is automatically  set to false when the --bigwig option is enabled.
__
  __
__--mid

__
  A boolean value to indicate whether the  midpoint between the actual 'start' and 'stop' values should be used. The default is to use only the 'start' position.
__
  __
__--zero

__
__--inter

__
  Source data is in interbase coordinate (0-base) system. Shift the  start position to base coordinate (1-base) system. Wig files are by  definition 1-based. This is automatically enabled when converting  from Bed or !BedGraph** files. Default is false.
__
  __
__--format `[`0 | 1 | 2 | 3`]`

__
  Indicate the number of decimal places the score value should be formatted. Acceptable values include 0, 1, 2, or 3 places. The default is to not format the score value.
__
  __
__--method `[`mean | median | sum | max`]`

__
  Define the method used to combine multiple data values at a single  position. Wig files do not tolerate multiple identical positions.
__
  __
__--log

__
  If multiple data values need to be combined at a single identical  position, indicate whether the data is in log2 space or not. This  affects the mathematics behind the combination method.
__
  __
__--bigwig

__
__--bw

__
  Indicate that a binary !BigWig** file should be generated instead of  a text wiggle file. A .wig file is first generated, then converted to  a .bw file, and then the .wig file is removed.
__
  __
__--chromof <**filename>

__
  When converting to a !BigWig** file, provide a two-column tab-delimited  text file containing the chromosome names and their lengths in bp.  Alternatively, provide a name of a database, below.
__
  __
__--db <**database>

__
  Specify the database from which chromosome lengths can be derived when  generating a bigwig file. This option is only required when generating  bigwig files. It may also be supplied from the metadata in the source  data file.
__
  __
__--bwapp </path/to/wigToBigWig>

__
  Specify the path to the UCSC wigToBigWig or bedGraphToBigWig conversion  utility. The default is to first check the !BioToolBox** configuration  file `biotoolbox.cfg` for the application path. Failing that, it will  search the default environment path for the utility. If found, it will  automatically execute the utility to convert the wig file.
__
  __
__--keep

__
  Keep the wig or bedGraph file after converting to a bigWig file. The  default is to delete the file if the bigWig conversion is successful.
__
  __
__--gz

__
  A boolean value to indicate whether the output wiggle  file should be compressed with gzip.
__
  __
__--version

__
  Print the version number.
__
  __
__--help

__
  Display the POD documentation
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This program will convert any tab-delimited data text file into a wiggle  formatted text file. This requires that the file contains not only the  scores bu also chromosomal coordinates, i.e. chromosome, start, and  (optionally) stop. The program should automatically detect these  columns (if appropriately labeled) or they can be specified. An option  exists to use the midpoint of a region, e.g. microarray probe.

The wig file format is specified by documentation supporting the UCSC  Genome Browser and detailed here: http://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/help/wiggle.html. Three formats are supported, 'fixedStep', 'variableStep', and 'bedGraph'.  The format may be requested or determined empirically from the input file  metadata. Genomic bin files generated with `BioToolBox` scripts record  the window and step values in the metadata, which are used to determine  the span and step wig values, respectively. The variableStep format  is otherwise generated by default. The span is, by default, 1 bp.

Wiggle files cannot tolerate multiple datapoints at the same identical  position, e.g. multiple microarray probes matching a repetitive sequence.  An option exists to mathematically combine these positions into one value.

Strand is not inherently supported in wig files. If you have stranded data,  they should be split into separate files. The `BioToolBox` script  `split_data_file.pl` can be used for this purpose.

A binary !BigWig** file may also be further generated from the   text wiggle file. The binary format is preferential to the text version  for a variety of reasons, including fast, random access and no loss in  data value precision. More information can be found at this location: http://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/help/bigWig.html. Conversion requires  !BigWig** file support, supplied by the external `wigToBigWig` or  `bedGraphToBigWig` utility available from UCSC.

==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Howard Hughes Medical Institute
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

