#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
get_ensembl_annotation.pl

==SYNOPSIS==
get_ensembl_annotation.pl `[`--options...`]` --species <**text>

{{{
  Options:
  --species <text>
  --out <filename>
  --(no)chromo
  --(no)protein
  --(no)rna
  --(no)miscrna
  --(no)snrna
  --(no)snorna
  --(no)mirna
  --(no)rrna
  --(no)trna
  --prefix
  --group <text>
  --host <host.address>
  --user <text>
  --pass <text>
  --printdb
  --version
  --help
}}}
{{{
}}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

__--species <**text>

__
  Enter the species name for the database to connect to. Common aliases,  e.g. human, may be acceptable. Check the EnsEMBL website for the species  databases available or print the list using the --printdb option below.
__
  __
__--out <**filename>

__
  Specify the output filename. By default, it uses the species name. An  extension will be added if necessary.
__
  __
__--(no)chromo

__
  Boolean flag to indicate whether or not to write (or not) features for  the toplevel chromosomes/scaffolds/contigs/sequences in the database.  The GFF type is the generic term 'chromosome'. The default is true.
__
  __
__--no(protein)

__
  Boolean flag to indicate whether or not to collect protein-coding genes  from the database. The default is true.
__
  __
__--(no)rna

__
  Boolean flag to indicate whether or not to collect all non-coding RNA  genes, including misc_RNA, snRNA, snoRNA, rRNA, tRNA, miRNA, and piRNA,  from the database. This option may be superseded by setting the  individual RNA options. For example, setting both --rna and --notrna  will collect all RNA types except tRNAs. The default is false.
__
  __
__--(no)miscrna

__
  Boolean flag to indicate whether or not to collect miscellenaeous  noncoding RNA genes.
__
  __
__--(no)snrna

__
  Boolean flag to indicate whether or not to collect small nuclear  RNA (snRNA) genes.
__
  __
__--(no)snorna

__
  Boolean flag to indicate whether or not to collect small nucleolar  RNA (snoRNA) genes.
__
  __
__--(no)mirna

__
  Boolean flag to indicate whether or not to collect micro  RNA (miRNA) genes.
__
  __
__--(no)rrna

__
  Boolean flag to indicate whether or not to collect ribosomal RNA  (rRNA) genes.
__
  __
__--(no)trna

__
  Boolean flag to indicate whether or not to collect transfer RNA    (tRNA) genes.
__
  __
__--prefix

__
  Boolean flag to prefix chromosome names with 'chr'. Some people and/or  downstream applications prefer chromosomes to be named as 'chr1'  instead of '1'. Only coordinate systems of type 'chromosome' are  changed, not scaffolds, contigs, etc. Default is false.
__
  __
__--group <**text>

__
  Specify the name of the database group with which to connect. The default  value is 'core'. See EnsEMBL documentation for more information.
__
  __
__--host <**host.address>

__
  Specify the Internet address of the EnsEMBL public MySQL database host.  The default value is 'ensembldb.ensembl.org'.
__
  __
__--user <**text>

__
  Specify the user name to connect as to the EnsEMBL public database.  The default value is 'anonymous'.
__
  __
__--pass <**text>

__
  Specify the password to use when connecting to the database. The default  value is none.
__
  __
__--printdb

__
  Print all of the available database names, species, and groups from the  connected EnsEMBL database. The program will exit after printing the list.
__
  __
__--version

__
  Print the version number.
__
  __
__--help

__
  Display this POD documentation.
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This program will connect to the public EnsEMBL MySQL database and  retrieve the latest genome annotation for a given species. It will  generate a GFF3 annotation file suitable for loading into a Bio::DB  database or genome browser. The GFF3 features generated are  multi-level nested gene->mRNA->CDS features. It will optionally  generate features for the top-level sequences (chromosomes, contigs,  scaffolds, etc.) and non-coding RNA genes (snRNA, tRNA, rRNA, etc.).

This program requires EnsEMBL's Perl API modules to connect to their public  MySQL servers. It is not available through CPAN, unfortunately, but you can  find installation instructions at http://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/api/api_installation.html.

Note that EnsEMBL releases new Perl API modules with each database  release. If you do not see the latest genome version (compared to what  is available on the web), you should update your EnsEMBL Perl modules.  The API version should be printed at the beginning of execution.

==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Howard Hughes Medical Institute
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

{{{
}}}
