#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
split_data_file.pl

A script to split a data file by rows based on common data values.

==SYNOPSIS==
split_data_file.pl `[`--options`]` <**filename>

{{{
  Options:
  --in <filename>
  --index <column_index>
  --max <integer>
  --gz
  --version
  --help
}}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

__--in <**filename>

__
  Specify the file name of a data file. It must be a tab-delimited text file, preferably in the tim data format as described in Bio::!ToolBox**::file_helper,  although any format should work. The file may be compressed with gzip.
__
  __
__--index <**column_index>

__
__--col <**column_index>

__
  Provide the index number of the column or dataset containing the values  used to split the file. If not specified, then the index is requested  from the user in an interactive mode.
__
  __
__--max <**integer>

__
  Optionally specify the maximum number of data lines to write to each  file. Each group of specific value data is written to one or more files.  Enter as an integer; underscores may be used as thousands separator, e.g.  100_000.
__
  __
__--gz

__
  Indicate whether the output files should be compressed  with gzip. Default behavior is to preserve the compression  status of the input file.
__
  __
__--version

__
  Print the version number.
__
  __
__--help

__
  Display the POD documentation
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This program will split a data file into multiple files based on common  values in the data table. All rows with the same value will be  written into the same file. A good example is chromosome, where all  data points for a given chromosome will be written to a separate file,  resulting in multiple files representing each chromosome found in the  original file. The column containing the values to split and group  should be indicated; if the column is not sepcified, it may be  selected interactively from a list of column headers.

If the max argument is set, then each group will be written to one or  more files, with each file having no more than the indicated maximum  number of data lines. This is useful to keep the file size reasonable,  especially when processing the files further and free memory is  constrained. A reasonable limit may be 100K or 1M lines.

The resulting files will be named using the basename of the input file,  appended with the unique group value (for example, the chromosome name) demarcated with a #. If a maximum line limit is set, then the file part  number is appended to the basename, padded with zeros to three digits  (to assist in sorting). Each file will have duplicated and preserved  metadata. The original file is preserved.

This program is intended as the complement to 'join_data_files.pl'.

==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Howard Hughes Medical Institute
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

