#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
graph_histogram.pl

A script to graph a histogram of a dataset of values

==SYNOPSIS==
graph_histogram.pl --bins <**integer> --size <**number> <**filename>  graph_histogram.pl --bins <**integer> --max <**number> <**filename>  graph_histogram.pl --size <**number> --max <**number> <**filename>

{{{
   --in <filename>
   --index <column_index>
   --bins <integer>
   --size <number>
   --min <number>
   --max <number>
   --ymax <integer>
   --yticks <integer>
   --skip <integer>
   --offset <integer>
   --format <integer>
   --lines
   --out <base_filename>
   --dir <output_directory>
   --help
}}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

__--in <**filename>

__
  Specify the file name of a previously generated feature dataset. The tim data format is preferable, although any other tab-delimited text  data formats may be usable. See the file description in `tim_db_helper.pm`.
__
  __
__--index <**column_index>

__
  Specify the column number(s) corresponding to the dataset(s) in the file to graph. Number is 0-based index. Each dataset should be  demarcated by a comma. A range of indices may also be specified using  a dash to demarcate the beginning and end of the inclusive range.  Two datasets may also be graphed together; these indices should be joined  with an ampersand. For example, "2,4-6,5&6" will individually graph  datasets 2, 4, 5, 6, and a combination 5 and 6 graph.
__
  __
  If no dataset indices are specified, then they may be chosen  interactively from a list.
__
  __
__--bins <**integer>

__
  Specify the number of bins or partitions into which the data will be  grouped. This argument is optional if --max and --size are provided.
__
  __
__--size <**number>

__
  Specify the size of each bin or partition. A decimal number may be  provided. This argument is optional if --bins and --max are provided.
__
  __
__--min <**number>

__
  Optionally indicate the minimum value of the bins. When generating  the list of bins, this is used as the starting value. Default is 0.  A negative number may be provided using the format --min=-1.
__
  __
__--max <**number>

__
  Specify the maximum bin value. This argument is optional if --bins  and --size are provided.
__
  __
__--ymax <**integer>

__
  Specify the maximum Y axis value. The default is automatically determined.
__
  __
__--yticks <**integer>

__
  Specify explicitly the number of major ticks for the Y axes.  The default is 4.
__
  __
__--skip <**integer>

__
  Specify the ordinal number of X axis major ticks to label. This  avoids overlapping labels. The default is 4 (every 4th tick is labeled).
__
  __
__--offset <**integer>

__
  Specify the number of X axis ticks to skip at the beginning before starting  to label them. This may help in adjusting the look of the graph. The  default is 0.
__
  __
__--format <**integer>

__
  Specify the number of decimal places the X axis labels should be formatted.  The default is 0.
__
  __
__--lines

__
  Optionally specify a line graph to be generated instead of the  default vertical bar graph.
__
  __
__--out

__
  Optionally specify the output filename prefix. The default value is  "distribution`_`".
__
  __
__--dir

__
  Optionally specify the name of the target directory to place the  graphs. The default value is the basename of the input file  appended with "`_`graphs".
__
  __
__--help

__
  Print this help documenation
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This program will generate PNG graphic files representing the histogram  of the values in one or two datasets. The size of each bin or partition  must be provided, as well as either the number of bins or the maximum  bin value. The resulting files are written to a subdirectory named after  the input file. The files are named after the dataset name (column  header) with a prefix.

==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Howard Hughes Medical Institute
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
