#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
db_setup.pl

==SYNOPSIS==
db_setup.pl `[`--options...`]` <**UCSC database>

{{{
  Options:
  --db <UCSC database>
  --path </path/to/store/database> 
  --table [refGene|ensGene|knownGene|xenoRefGene|all]
  --keep
  --version
  --help
}}}
{{{
}}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

__--db <**UCSC database>

__
  Provide the short UCSC database name for the species and version you want  to use. See <[http://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQreleases.html]> for a current  list of available UCSC genomes. Examples include hg19, mm10, danRer7,  sacCer3, etc.
__
  __
__--path </path/to/store/database>

__
  Specify the optional path to store the SQLite database file. The default  path is the `~/lib`.
__
  __
__--table `[`refGene|ensGene|knownGene|xenoRefGene|all`]`

__
  Provide one or more UCSC tables to load into the database. They may be  specified as comma-delimited list (no spaces) or as separate, repeated  arguments. The default is refGene, ensGene, and knownGene (if available).
__
  __
__--keep

__
  Keep the downloaded UCSC tables and converted GFF3 files. Default is to  delete them.
__
  __
__--version

__
  Print the version number.
__
  __
__--help

__
  Display this POD documentation.
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This program will simplify the task of generating an annotation database. You  provide the short name of the UCSC database for the species and genome version  you are interested in, and the script will automatically download gene annotation  and build a ___Bio::DB::!SeqFeature**::Store___ database for use with !BioToolBox**  scripts.

==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

