#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
db_types.pl

A script to print out the available feature types in a database.

==SYNOPSIS==
db_types.pl <**database>

{{{
  Options:
  --db <database>
  --version
  --help
  }}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

__--db <**database>

__
  Specify the name of a `Bio::DB::SeqFeature::Store` annotation database  from which gene or feature annotation may be derived. If not specified,  then a list of known databases in the !BioToolBox** configuration file  `.biotoolbox.cfg` will be presented as a list to the user.
__
  __
  For more information about using annotation databases,  see <[https://code.google.com/p/biotoolbox/wiki/WorkingWithDatabases]>.
__
  __
__--version

__
  Print the version number.
__
  __
__--help

__
  Display this POD documentation.
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This program will print a list of all of the known feature types present  in a Bio::DB::!SeqFeature**::Store database. The types are organized into  groups by their source tag.

!BigWigSet** databases, comprised of a directory of !BigWig** files and a  metadata file, are also supported.

==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Howard Hughes Medical Institute
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

