#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
!CpG_calculator**.pl

A script to calculate observed vs expected CpG dinucleotides

==SYNOPSIS==
!CpG_calculator**.pl --fasta <**directory|filename> `[`--options...`]`

!CpG_calculator**.pl --db <**text> `[`--options...`]`

{{{
  Options:
  --db <name|file|directory>
  --fasta <file|directory>
  --in <filename>
  --win <integer>
  --out <filename> 
  --gz
  --cpu <integer>
  --version
  --help
}}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

__--db <**name|file|directory>

__
__--fasta <**file|directory>

__
  Provide the name of a Bio::DB::!SeqFeature**::Store database from which to  collect the genomic sequence. Alternatively, provide the name  of an uncompressed Fasta file (multi-fasta is ok) or directory containing  multiple fasta files representing the genomic sequence. The directory  must be writeable for a small index file to be written. For more information  about using databases, see  <[https://code.google.com/p/biotoolbox/wiki/WorkingWithDatabases]>.  The database may be provided in the metadata of an input file.
__
  __
__--in <**filename>

__
  Optionally specify an input file containing either a list of database features  or genomic coordinates for which to collect data. The file should be a  tab-delimited text file, one row per feature, with columns representing  feature identifiers, attributes, coordinates, and/or data values. The  first row should be column headers. Text files generated by other  _*_!BioToolBox**_*_ scripts are acceptable. Files may be gzipped compressed.
__
  __
__--win <**integer>

__
  Optionally provide the window size in bp with which to scan the genome.  Option is ignored if an input file is provided. Default is 1000 bp.
__
  __
__--out <**filename>

__
  Specify the output filename. By default it uses the input file base  name if provided. Required if no input file is provided.
__
  __
__--gz

__
  Specify whether (or not) the output file should be compressed with gzip.
__
  __
__--cpu <**integer>

__
  Specify the number of CPU cores to execute in parallel. This requires  the installation of Parallel::!ForkManager**. With support enabled, the  default is 2. Disable multi-threaded execution by setting to 1.
__
  __
__--version

__
  Print the version number.
__
  __
__--help

__
  Display this POD documentation.
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This program will calculate percent GC composition, number of CpG  dinucleotide pairs, number of expected CpG dinucleotide pairs based  on GC content, and the ratio of observed / expected CpG pairs.  Calculations are performed on either windows across the entire genome  (default behavior using 1000 bp windows) or user-provided regions in an  input file (BED, GFF, or custom text file are supported).

Genomic sequence may be provided in two ways. First, a Fasta file or  directory of Fasta files may be provided. A small index file will be  written to assist in random access using the Bio::DB::Fasta module.  Alternatively, a Bio::DB::!SeqFeature**::Store database with sequence may  be provided. Depending on the database driver and implementation, the  fasta option is usually faster.

The four additional columns of information are appended to the input  or generated file.

==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Howard Hughes Medical Institute
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

