#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
average_gene.pl

==SYNOPSIS==
{{{
 average_gene.pl --db <database> --feature <text> --out <file> [--options]
 average_gene.pl --in <file> --out <file> [--options]
  }}}
{{{
  Options:
  --db <database>
  --feature [type, type:source, alias]
  --out <filename>
  --in <filename> 
  --data <dataset_name>
  --method [mean|median|sum|count]
  --bins <integer>
  --ext <integer>
  --extsize <integer>
  --min <integer>
  --strand [all|sense|antisense]
  --sum
  --smooth
  --set_strand
  --(no)log
  --help
}}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

{{{
}}}
__--db <**database>

__
  Specify the name of the !BioPerl** !SeqFeature**::Store database to use. This is  optional if the desired database is defined in the input file metadata.
__
  __
__--out <**filename>

__
  Specify the output file name.
__
  __
__--in <**filename>

__
  Specify the filename of a data table containing the list of  features to average. The file must be in the 'tim_data' format and specify  a feature to use. If not specified, then a new feature list will be  generated from the database.
__
  __
__--feature `[`type, type:source, alias`]`

__
  Specify the type of feature from which to collect values. This is required  for new feature tables. Two types of values may be passed: either a specific  feature type present in the database, or an alias to one or more features.  The feature may be specified as either type or type:source. Aliases are  specified in the `tim_db_helper.cfg` file, and provide a shortcut to a  list of one or more features. More than feature may be included as a  comma-delimited list (no commas).
__
  __
__--data <**text>

__
  Specify the name of the microarray data set for which you wish to  collect data. If not specified, the data set may be  chosen interactively from a presented list. When enumerating features,  the features' type or type:source values should be indicated.
__
  __
__--method `[`mean|median|sum|count`]`

__
  Specify the method of collecting and combining the data into each bin.  Three statistical methods for combining score values are allowed: mean,  median, and sum. In addition, features may be enumerated or counted  within each bin. The defined method does not affect the interpolation or  summary functions of the program, only initial data collection. The  default method is 'mean'.
__
  __
__--bins <**integer>

__
  Specify the number of bins that will be generated over the length  of the feature. The size of the feature is a percentage of the  feature length. The default number is 10, which results in bins of  size equal to 10% of the feature length.
__
  __
__--ext <**integer>

__
  Specify the number of extended bins on either side of the feature.  The bins are of the same size as determined by the feature  length and the --bins value. The default is 0.
__
  __
__--extsize <**integer>

__
  Specify the exact bin size in bp of the extended bins rather than using a percentage of feature of length.
__
  __
__--min <**integer>

__
  Specify the minimum feature size to be averaged. Features with a length below this value will not be skipped (all bins will have null values). This is to avoid having bin sizes below the average  microarray tiling distance.
__
  __
__--strand `[`all|sense|antisense`]`

__
  Specify whether stranded data should be collected. Three values are  allowed: all datasets should be collected (default), only sense  datasets, or only antisense datasets should be collected.
__
  __
__--sum

__
  Indicate that the data should be averaged across all features at each position, suitable for graphing. A separate text file will be written with the suffix '`_`summed' with the averaged data
__
  __
__--smooth

__
  Indicate that windows without values should (not) be interpolated from neighboring values. The default is false.
__
  __
__--set_strand

__
  For features that are not inherently stranded (strand value of 0),  impose an artificial strand for each feature (1 or -1). This will  have the effect of enforcing a relative orientation for each feature,  or to collected stranded data. This requires the presence a  column in the input data file with a name of "strand". Hence, it  will not work with newly generated datasets, but only with input  data files. Default is false.
__
  __
__--(no)log

__
  Dataset values are (not) in log2 space and should be treated  accordingly. Output values will be in the same space.
__
  __
__--help

__
  This help text.
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This program will collect data across a gene body into bins to generate an 'average' gene summary. It is used to determine if there is a spatial  distribution preference for the dataset over gene bodies. The number of bins may be specified as a command argument (default 10). Additionally, extra bins  may be extended on either side of the gene (default 0 on either side). The bin  size is determined as a percentage of gene length.

The program writes out a tim data formatted text file.

{{{
}}}
==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Howard Hughes Medical Institute
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
