#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
split_bam_paired_by_size.pl

==SYNOPSIS==
split_bam_paired_by_size.pl `[`--options`]` <**file.bam>

{{{
  Options:
  --in <file.bam>
  --min <integer>
  --max <integer>
  --size <min-max>
  --out <filename>
  --at
  --help
}}}
{{{
}}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

__--in <**file.bam>

__
  Specify the file name of a binary BAM file as described for Samtools.  Use samtools to convert text sam files to binary bam files. The file  should be indexed; this program should be able to do it for you  automatically if it is not (assuming the bam directory is writeable).
__
  __
__--min <**integer>

__
  Optionally specify the minimum size of fragment to include in the output GFF file. The default value is 100 bp.
__
  __
__--max <**integer>

__
  Optionally specify the maximum size of fragment to include in the output GFF file. The default value is 200 bp.
__
  __
__--size <**min-max>

__
  When multiple size ranges are desired, they may be specified using the  size option. Define the minimum and maximum size as a range separated by  a dash (no spaces). Use this option repeatedly for multiple size ranges.  The size option takes precedence over the min and max options.
__
  __
__--out <**filename>

__
  Optionally specify the base name of the output file. The default is to use  base input name. The output file names are appended with '.$min`_`$max'.
__
  __
__--at

__
  Boolean option to indicate that only fragments whose paired sequence reads  end in a `[`AT`]` nucleotide should be included in the output GFF file.  Micrococcal nuclease (MNase) cuts (almost?) exclusively at AT dinucleotides;  this option ensures that the fragment is more likely derived from a MNase  cut.
__
  __
__--help

__
  Display the POD documentation
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This program will read a BAM file containing paired-read alignments and write a new BAM file containing only those successfully aligned paired  reads whose insert size fall within the set minimum and maximum  lengths inclusively (defaults of 100 and 200 bp, respectively).

Multiple size ranges may be specified, and pairs within each range are  written to separate files.

Additionally, fragments may be checked for the presence of an A/T nucleotide  at the 5' end of the sequence, as is usually produced by digestion with  Micrococcal Nuclease.

The input and output files are BAM files as described by the Samtools  project (http://samtools.sourceforge.net).

The input file should be sorted and indexed prior to sizing. The output file  will also be automatically re-sorted and re-indexed for you.

==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Howard Hughes Medical Institute
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
