#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
graph_profile.pl

A script to graph values along a specific X-axis

==SYNOPSIS==
graph_profile.pl <**filename>

{{{
   --in <filename>
   --index <index1,index2,...>
   --all
   --(no)cen
   --(no)log
   --min <number>
   --max <number>
   --x <integer>
   --dir <foldername>
   --help
}}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

__--in <**filename>

__
  Specify the file name of a previously generated feature dataset. The tim data format is preferable, although any other tab-delimited text  data formats may be usable. See the file description in `tim_db_helper.pm`.
__
  __
__--index <**index>

__
  Specify the column number(s) corresponding to the dataset(s) in the file to graph. Number is 0-based index. Each dataset should be  demarcated by a comma. A range of indices may also be specified using  a dash to demarcate the beginning and end of the inclusive range.  Multiple datasets to be graphed together should be joined with an ampersand.  For example, "2,4-6,5&6" will individually graph datasets 2, 4, 5, 6,  and a combination 5 and 6 graph.
__
  __
  If no dataset indices are specified, then they may be chosen  interactively from a list.
__
  __
__--(no)log

__
  Dataset values are (not) in log2 space, or status should be respected  if indicated in the file metadata.
__
  __
__--cen

__
  Datasets should be median centered prior to graphing. Useful when  graphing multiple datasets together when they have different  medians.
__
  __
__--min <**number>, --max <**number>

__
  Specify the minimum and/or maximum values for the Y-axis. The default  values are automatically determined from the dataset.
__
  __
__--x <**index>

__
  Specify the index of the X-axis dataset. Unless specified, the program  automatically uses the columns labeled 'Midpoint' or 'Window', if  present.
__
  __
__--dir

__
  Optionally specify the name of the target directory to place the  graphs. The default value is the basename of the input file  appended with "`_`graphs".
__
  __
__--help

__
  Print this help documenation
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This program will generate PNG graphic files representing a profile of  values plotted along a specific X-axis. For example, plotting values  along genomic coordinates or relative positions along a feature. The  X-axis values are static and each dataset is plotted against it. One or  more datasets may be plotted on a single graph, each in a different  color, with a legend printed beneath the graph. The graph is a simple  Bezier-smoothed line graph.

The resulting files are written to a subdirectory named after  the input file. The files are named after the dataset name (column  header) with a prefix.

==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Howard Hughes Medical Institute
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
