#summary Converted POD documentation.
#labels ManPage
_This page was generated from POD using [http://code.google.com/p/pod2gcw pod2gcw] and is not intended for editing._

==NAME==
locate_SNPs.pl

==SYNOPSIS==
{{{
 locate_SNPs.pl --db <database> <snp_file1> ...
  }}}
{{{
  Options:
  --in <snp_file>
  --db <database>
  --help
}}}
==OPTIONS==
The command line flags and descriptions:

__--in <**snp_file>

__
  Specify the name(s) of the input SNP file. Multiple files may be  specified using multiple --in arguments, with a single --in argument and a  comma delimited list, or as a list at the end of all options. The files may  kept gzipped; they will automatically be uncompressed.
__
  __
__--db

__
  Specify the name of a single GFF3 genome annotation file. This is required. Ideally, a database would be specified, but I am having difficulty accessing  the child CDS features of genes to get at the coding frame to identify  codon changes.
__
  __
__--help

__
  This help text.
__
  __
==DESCRIPTION==
This program will locate SNPs and other sequence variants and identify  which gene the variant is located in, the type of polymorphism (insertion,  deletion, substitution), and, if the variant is located within a CDS, whether  a codon change is generated.

The input files should be files generated using the varFilter function of the samtools.pl script, included with the !SamTools** distribution <[http://samtools.sourceforge.net]>. That script will generate a list of the sequence variations that differ from the reference genome. No verification of the source file format is performed. The files may be gzipped.

{{{
}}}
==AUTHOR==
{{{
 Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
 Howard Hughes Medical Institute
 Dept of Oncological Sciences
 Huntsman Cancer Institute
 University of Utah
 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112
}}}
This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GPL (either version 1, or at your option, any later version) or the Artistic License 2.0.

{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
{{{
}}}
