# Bio::ToolBox - get\_feature\_info

|[Home](ReadMe.md)|[Install](AdvancedInstallation.md)|[Libraries](Libraries.md)|[Applications](Applications.md)|[Examples](Examples.md)|[FAQ](FAQ.md)|

## get\_feature\_info.pl

A program to collect feature information from a BioPerl SeqFeature::Store db.

## SYNOPSIS

get\_feature\_info.pl &lt;filename> 

    File options:
    -i --in <filename>                        input file of list db features
    -o --out <filename>                       optional output file
    
    Database options:
    -d --db <name>                            annotation database: mysql sqlite
                                                or annotation file: gtf gff ucsc
    -a --attrib <attribute1,attribute2,...>   list of attributes to collect
    -t --type <primary_tag>                   specify a feature type as needed
    
    General options:
    -z --gz                                   compress output file
    -v --version                              print version and exit
    -h --help                                 show extended documentation
    
    Attributes include:
     Chromosome
     Start
     Stop
     Strand
     Score
     Name
     Alias
     Note
     Type
     Primary_tag
     Source
     Length
     Midpoint
     Phase
     RNA_count (number of transcript subfeatures)
     Exon_count (number of exon subfeatures)
     Gene_length (sum of all merged, collapsed, transcript exon lengths)
     Transcript_length (sum of exon lengths)
     Parent (name)
     Primary_ID
     <tag>

## OPTIONS

The command line flags and descriptions:

### File options

- --in &lt;filename>

    Specify an input file containing either a list of database features or 
    genomic coordinates for which to collect data. The file should be a 
    tab-delimited text file, one row per feature, with columns representing 
    feature identifiers, attributes, coordinates, and/or data values. The 
    first row should be column headers. Text files generated by other 
    **BioToolBox** scripts are acceptable. Files may be gzipped compressed.

- --out &lt;filename>

    Optionally specify an alternate output file name. The default is to 
    overwrite the input file.

### Database options

- --db &lt;name>

    Specify the name or SQLite file of a [Bio::DB::SeqFeature::Store](https://metacpan.org/pod/Bio%3A%3ADB%3A%3ASeqFeature%3A%3AStore) 
    annotation database from which the information may be derived. This may 
    be stored in the metadata comments of the input file, or an alternative 
    file may be provided. 

    Alternatively, specify an annotation file, e.g. GTF, GFF3, or UCSC gene 
    table, that may be parsed into memory. 

    The input file should include Name or ID columns that match features in the 
    provided database. If a Type column is not present, then a type should be 
    provided with the `--type` option. Note that mixing and matching files and  
    databases may not always work as well as intended.

- --attrib &lt;attribute>

    Specify the attribute to collect for each feature. Standard GFF attributes 
    may be collected, as well as values from specific group tags. These tags 
    are found in the group (ninth) column of the source GFF file. Standard 
    attributes include the following

    - Chromosome
    - Start
    - Stop
    - Strand
    - Score
    - Name
    - Alias
    - Note
    - Type
    - Primary\_tag
    - Source
    - Length
    - Midpoint
    - Phase
    - RNA\_count (number of transcript subfeatures)
    - Exon\_count (number of exon subfeatures)
    - Gene\_length (sum of all merged, collapsed, transcript exon lengths)
    - Transcript\_length (sum of exon lengths)
    - Parent (name)
    - Primary\_ID
    - &lt;tag>

    If attrib is not specified on the command line, then an interactive list 
    will be presented to the user for selection. Especially useful when you 
    can't remember the feature's tag keys in the database.

- --type &lt;primary\_tag>

    When the input file does not have a type column, a type or primary\_tag 
    may be provided. This is especially useful to restrict the database 
    search when there are multiple features with the same name.

### General options

- --gz

    Indicate whether the output file should (not) be compressed by gzip. 
    If compressed, the extension '.gz' is appended to the filename. If a compressed 
    file is opened, the compression status is preserved unless specified otherwise.

- --version

    Print the version number.

- --help

    Display this help. 

## DESCRIPTION

This program will collect attributes for a list of features from the database. 
The attributes may be general attributes, such as chromsome, start, stop, 
strand, etc., or feature specific attributes stored in the original group 
field of the original source GFF file.

## AUTHOR

    Timothy J. Parnell, PhD
    Howard Hughes Medical Institute
    Dept of Oncological Sciences
    Huntsman Cancer Institute
    University of Utah
    Salt Lake City, UT, 84112

This package is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the Artistic License 2.0.  
